---
layout: page
modal-id: 4
date: 2018-05-24
img: day4.png
alt: image-alt
permalink: /day4
---

# Day 4 Materials

## Downloads

+ Download [Slides](link)
+ Download [Exercise files](link)
+ Download [Exercise solutions](link)

----------------------------



## Part I: Regular expressions

**Perform these exercises in a text editor or [https://pythex.org/](https://pythex.org/) directly, NOT in a Python console/script.**


1.  Use regular expressions to change the contents of the FASTA sequence file [exampleGFP_raw.fasta](./exampleGFP_raw.fasta) to match the contents of the file [exampleGFP_clean.fasta](./exampleGFP_clean.fasta). 

2. Generate a single masterful regular expression that can match a phone number in *any of the following formats below* and convert it to a phone number into this format: `(XXX)-XXX-XXXX`. 

    ```python
    555-555-1234
    555.555.4321
    555 555 4321
    (555).555.6789
    (555)-555-0123
    ```		
        
## Part II: The `re` module

**Perform these exercises in Python using the `re` module.**


1. The file `fixed_width.txt` is a *fixed-width* file, meaning that each column is delimited by an arbitrary number of spaces to increase human-readability. This format, however, is the bane of the programmer's existence, as we like to have standardized delimiters. Use regular expressions to convert this file into a CSV file called `fixed_width_asCSV.csv`.

2. Use the `re` module to change the file contents of the file `data1_raw.txt` to match the contents of the file `data1_clean.txt`. Hints:
	+ **Split** (with `.split()`) each line in the file into its individual columns, and use regular expressions (when needed) to reform each column
	+ **Join** (with `.join()`) new columns back together to create the new lines
	+ Remember that the first line of the file is the header and should be treated differently from lines containing content
	+ For an extra challenge, write functions for the conversion of each column
	
3. Looking for more? Redo the exercises from part 1 in Python scripts, making use of the `re` module.


## Part III: File manipulation

1. 
There are 100 files in a directory where only some of them are of use to you.
for those useful files, 
create a new csv that contains the 1st, 2nd, 3rd columns of each of those files and make the first column the ID of the file (not the full name)

Go about this in steps: as follows:
1. use the `os` module to obtain the list of meaningful files. For a bonus use list comprehension!
2. i need to figure out what this exercise is first.
......



2. For a gtf file in here, use the SYS module to accept a user argument, (chromosome number) and create a new file with only those chromosomes
3. Make this sexier: create a file with those chromosomes and only for sequences on the positive strand
4. and amazingly even sexier, only for those sequences on positive strand and some other attribute.
<!--
## Part IV: Biopython

1. Query some information 
-->

